[DO NOT MERGE] Documentation (#111)
canonical/kyuubi-k8s-operator: docs/how-to/h-external-access.md

# How to connect from outside of Kubernetes

> To expose Charmed Apache Kyuubi K8s externally, this charm provides a configuration option `expose-external` (with options `false`, `nodeport` and `loadbalancer`) to control precisely how the service will be exposed.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Improve wording to avoid repetition.

```suggestion
To expose Charmed Apache Kyuubi K8s externally, use the `expose-external` configuration option. Possible values are: `false`, `nodeport`, and `loadbalancer`.
```

> By default (when `expose-external=false`), Charmed Apache Kyuubi K8s create a K8s service of type `ClusterIP` which it provides as endpoints to the related client applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default (when `expose-external=false`), Charmed Apache Kyuubi K8s creates a K8s service of type `ClusterIP` which it provides as endpoints to the related client applications.
```

> These endpoints are only accessible from within the K8s namespace (or juju model) where the Charmed Apache Kyuubi K8s is deployed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These endpoints are only accessible from within the K8s namespace (or Juju model) where the Charmed Apache Kyuubi K8s is deployed.
```

> Below is a juju models where Charmed Apache Kyuubi K8s is related to Data Integrator, which we will later use to demonstrate the configuration of `expose-external`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is a Juju model where Charmed Apache Kyuubi K8s is related to Data Integrator, which we will later use to demonstrate the configuration of `expose-external`:
```

data-integrator                    active      1  data-integrator            latest/stable  161  10.152.183.94   no
integration-hub                    active      1  spark-integration-hub-k8s  latest/edge     43  10.152.183.220  no
kyuubi-k8s                1.10     active      3  kyuubi-k8s                 latest/edge     92  10.152.183.84   no
s3                                 active      1  s3-integrator              1/stable       146  10.152.183.103  no
zookeeper                 3.8.2    active      1  zookeeper-k8s              3/stable        78  10.152.183.42   no

Unit                         Workload  Agent  Address       Ports  Message
auth-db/0*                   active    idle   10.1.111.95          Primary
data-integrator/0*           active    idle   10.1.111.66
integration-hub/0*           active    idle   10.1.111.101
kyuubi-k8s/0                 active    idle   10.1.111.80
kyuubi-k8s/1                 active    idle   10.1.111.78
kyuubi-k8s/2*                active    idle   10.1.111.98
s3/0*                        active    idle   10.1.111.77
zookeeper/0*                 active    idle   10.1.111.114
```

> When `expose-external=false`, the following shows the endpoint returned to the client:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `expose-external=false`, to see the endpoint returned to the client:
```

```shell
juju run data-integrator/0 get-credentials
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The output contains both the endpoint and credentials, for example:

```

```yaml
kyuubi:
  data: '{"database": "test", "external-node-connectivity": "true", "provided-secrets":
    "[\"mtls-cert\"]", "requested-secrets": "[\"username\", \"password\", \"tls\",
    \"tls-ca\", \"uris\", \"read-only-uris\"]"}'
  database: test
  endpoints: kyuubi-k8s-service.jubilant-7db2fec3.svc.cluster.local:10009
  password: 31rwWzk8wpnhoZvU
  tls: "False"
  uris: jdbc:hive2://kyuubi-k8s-service.jubilant-7db2fec3.svc.cluster.local:10009/
  username: relation_id_15
  version: 1.10.2
ok: "True"
```

> ## External access

Reviewer: Question: Can we change this heading? It seems a bit confusing, since the whole page is about external access. Maybe we need to call the page differently? For example, the page "How to connect" and headings Internal access and External access.

Reviewer: To be honest, I'm not sure we even need this headings. I think we can simplify and shorten this page a lot and have the same process for both internal and external - Juju config, juju run - and just explain different options as we go.

Author: Streamlined this file in 05848d2dee9323e6f81291c833be0045ff8706e2

```{note}
We recommend exposing the service using Loadbalancer.

> ```

Reviewer: Suggestion: Let's move it lower.

```suggestion
```

> Charmed Apache Kyuubi K8s can be made externally accessible by setting `expose-external=loadbalancer` (or `expose-external=nodeport`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make Charmed Apache Kyuubi K8s accessible from outside of Kubernetes, set the `expose-external` parameter to `loadbalancer` or `nodeport`.
```

> When `expose-external=loadbalancer`, Charmed Apache Kyuubi K8s will provide as endpoint the K8s LoadBalancer service IP (or hostname, depending on your K8s cluster provider) and port.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Let's move the note here, after the initial introduction. That looks better and provides better flow - we introduce both options and then recommend one.
Additionally, we should use the Discourse syntax for admonitions.

````suggestion

[note]
We recommend exposing the service using the `loadbalancer` option.
[/note]

When `expose-external` is set to `loadbalancer`, Charmed Apache Kyuubi K8s will provide as endpoint the K8s LoadBalancer service IP (or hostname, depending on your K8s cluster provider) and port.
````

```shell
juju config kyuubi-k8s expose-external=loadbalancer

# wait for active-idle
juju run data-integrator/0 get-credentials

> ```

Reviewer: Suggestion: Replace a comment inside a code block with proper text.

````suggestion
```shell
juju config kyuubi-k8s expose-external=loadbalancer
```

Wait for the application to settle up with the `active` / `idle` status and retrieve credentials:

```shell
juju run data-integrator/0 get-credentials
```
````

> 

Reviewer: Suggestion: Add text between code blocks.

```suggestion

The output of this command contains both endpoint and credentials, for example:

```
